Let me just correct one thing. I was talking about
the preferred growth sketch. The preferred
growth sketch was what the planning department
came up with in November of 1976, and what the city
council approved in March of 1977 was entitled the
San Antonio
the San Antonio growth sketch. And that was the
thing that was officially approved by city
council.
So what we're talking about is the whole growth
study
project that was initiated during
Cipriano Guerra's tenure as director of
planning. It's important also to realize that
several very significant things happened during
this period of time which caused San Antonio's
more recent planning activities to happen. The
first of which is that the council that was elected
in 1975,
in April of 1975, took office on the 1st of May,
1975,
was the council for the first time that the Good
Government League did not dominate. There were
only three of the nine council members were Good
Government League people. The mayor, Mayor
Cockrell, Henry Cisneros, who was elected for the
first time in 1975, and Phil Pendous were the three
council members. The rest were members of the
independent team. The significant thing about
that is that one of the members of the independent
team was a man by the name of Glenn Hartman. And
Hartman was a person who came out of civil service
working for the Air Force and was basically a
strategic planner. He wasn't a land planner or a
city planner, He was probably as much as anyone
responsible for getting the city of San Antonio to
start thinking seriously about a plan again. What
Hartman did was he read Article 9 of the city
charter and asked the question, why doesn't the
city of San Antonio have a plan when the charter
says thou shall have a plan? And he worked with a
retired colonel by the name of Bill Dodds,
D-O-D-D-S, to research what were the reasons,
particularly the structural reasons, which kept
the city of San Antonio from developing a plan.
Everybody recognized we didn't have a plan.
Everybody recognized that the Charter said you
would have one. The question was why we didn't. It
appears from the chronology of planning and
planters in San Antonio so far that San Antonio
could be looked at as a graveyard for planters.
You have to explain. I don't understand what you
mean. Well, their tenure was very short. And they
were usually run out of town or run out of the state.
Well, that's not true. That only happened.
That happened, the only one that was kind of run off
because of a specific planning activity was
Charles Stromberg. Davis, it was a, well, Davis
was a combination, no, Davis, I think, was a
combination of his personality and planning.
And, you know, you know Ed as well as I do, and he had a
very strong personality. Ed Davis resigned. He
wasn't fired. And he resigned because of some
things that he strongly believed in. So I don't
think it's fair to characterize San Antonio as a
graveyard for planning. Well, I think there is a
certain amount of truth in it, regardless of...
Well, I just disagree totally with that. Why do you
disagree? I know I can't.
You know, I think that there were some people
that... Well, first of all, let me back up and say
First of all, I don't think the community knew what
planning was. And the community didn't really
think that the city should be involved in
planning. And there were some people that were
strongly opposed to city staff planners doing any
planning. But I don't think that's unlike many
other cities go through a period of time where
people don't appreciate or understand the value
of planning. And I think that was true in San
Antonio during that period of planning. It did
have the result after Davis left and after
Stromberg was fired of many of those people that
Davis attracted to the planning department got
disillusioned and left. And they're spread all
across the country right now. And that's very
unfortunate because Davis was able to, as I said,
attract Well, this is part of why I mentioned that
characterization. Well, but I still don't like
the statement that it was a graveyard. Well, I'm
sure you don't like it. Okay, well, let's put a mush
on. Okay, then, the other point I was going to make
about these factors that contributed to the
current, to the late 1970s planning effort is that
One of the things that came out of the Hartman-Dodd
study was the fact that the then Planning and
Zoning Commission really was spending all of its
time hearing zoning cases and approving
subdivision plots and really had no time to do
planning. So again, for the second time, the city
council in March of 1976 officially split the
Planning and Zoning Commission in two
commissions. The Zoning Commission, which was
charged with all the zoning, and the Planning
Commission, which was specifically charged with
engaging in an active effort to come up with a plan
for the city of San Antonio. And to this day, we
still have two commissions in San Antonio. Did
Hartman Stick around to make sure that the
Planning Commission would attend to its charge.
Yes. Hartman was around. He was first elected in
1975,
was re-elected in 77, and
may have even been, let's see, 79. No, he was out by
79. But what he did, he was around for four years,
almost four years, three and a half years. And not
only did he keep his interest in planning and be
very supportive, but also he was responsible for
getting Bill Dodds on the planning commission. In
other words, it was an attempt to not only create a
planning commission, but to make sure that at
least a significant number of its members were
people that had some appreciation for plant. When
we discussed earlier the split of the commission
in the 61 to 63 period, I don't think that there were
people on the commission during that period of
time that really understood what it was to, what
effort it would take to do a plan and what role the
commission had to play. I think that was different
by 1976. I had met Hartman at one of the short
courses that the AIP was giving during those days.
And I was very impressed with Hartman and with his
knowledge of comprehensive planning and the need
for it in San Antonio. energy and commitment to the
idea that San Antonio was going to have
comprehensive planning. Yeah, I think, again, if
this project gets to the point where he's a person
that should be talked to, Glenn has kind of changed
a lot. He's very bitter about government in San
Antonio. He's moved from San Antonio. He now lives
in Austin. And he's head of some state agency
that's in charge with all state buildings. but he
is definitely someone that probably should be
talked to because he did play kind of a critical
role in that 1975 through 77 period when there was a
major effort to get the city to do a plan that the
charter had called for all along.
And the other thing that happened The third thing,
we were just talking about some of the major things
that are occurring here, was that in January of
1977, there was only the second major change in the
charter since 1951. And that change was to expand
the number of city council members from 9 to 11 and
to elect the council members by district rather
than at large. So, all of them? All of them. Well,
except for the mayor. The mayor runs citywide, but
all ten council
persons other than the mayor run from geographic
districts. So, on May 1st, 1977, we had basically a
very different council in San Antonio. We had a
council made up of people that represented
geographic areas. Many of those people were also
people that were serving for the first time, many
of whom had defeated incumbents
that had been on the previous council and just had a
whole different view of what San Antonio should be
doing with respect to its growth and development.
So that was another major effect that an
environmental effect that
had a major impact on San Antonio's effort in the
late 1970s to develop the plan. Guerra stepped
down. Well, basically what happened actually is
in addition to the split of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Planning Department was
reconstituted Sometime also in 1976 and
community
development was split off and again there was a
department of planning per se and in
June of 1976 Robert Hunter became director of
planning and served for about a four year period of
time. And during his tenure as director of
planning, most of the big battles and
controversies about the plan and what it should be
occurred. And he departed, he resigned, I guess it
was sometime in 1980, I don't recall when,
under some pressure to do so. I have firsthand
knowledge of that. Bob was in architecture at A&M.
Yes. And has his degree in architecture. Yes. And I
think that says a lot about his approach to
planning, that he was very visually oriented and
not very development process oriented, and
probably didn't have a very good understanding of
the role. of the development community and how it
can interface with public agencies. And I think
that he probably had to learn that. Well, let me
just say that. Two things in response. One is that
I'm not necessarily sure it was just his
architectural training. Because I can name an
architect that I know who probably has as much
insight in planning as anyone who's gone through
professional planning and had experience. I
think we all can do that. But I think part of the
problem with Bob is that his whole orientation was
public agency. He had come to the planning
department from the San Antonio Development
Agency as their planning manager, and his He was
dealing with project planning and basically
public sector planning there. So he really had not
worked a great deal with the private sector in
terms of development. So it probably was less his
education and more his own personal feelings and
his previous experiences.
and there was all kinds of politics involved in
that also, but be that as it may, he in 76 became
director of planning and one of his first tasks was
the revival and getting something done about the
growth sketch itself and as I said, that occurred
in March of 77 with the council approving the San
Antonio grill sketch. So basically, by March of
77, or just before the first new city council took
office on May 1, new meaning the expanded, elected
by district city council, then there was a buy-off
on the basic policies for developing a plan and a
charge to develop a plan itself. And that's where
we were in the spring of 1977 and really the next
three or four years. What do you mean by a buy-off?
Well, I mean that the council had bought off on some
policies as embodied in the San Antonio growth
sketch, that would serve as a basis for the
planners and the planning commission to come up
with a plan and had given, on a number of occasions,
had given the charge to let's get a plan done. And
then as I said, then the Hunter era, a four-year
period of time was a period of time during which
there was, one might say, all hell broke loose in
terms of
major efforts to develop a plan and a lot of
controversy about what the role of planning in San
Antonio should be and how the community should
grow over a period of time. You want
to ask a question, or what? No, we were going on
about Hunter, and then he was under some pressure
to leave, and then after Hunter, what happened?
Oh, well, wait a minute. You can't skip over
Hunter. I'm
not skipping over anybody. Well, let me...
After... After the San Antonio growth sketch had
been approved in
March of 1977, the effort then was how do we go from
this to a plan to meet the requirements of the
charter and to meet the desires of the then city
council. So that was largely the responsibility
of the Planning Commission, which was separate at
that time and chaired by Margaret Lexner,
L-E-C-Z-N-A-R, and the Planning Department,
which at that time was headed by Bob Hunter.
Kind of one of the first things that were done was to
look at how one might organize the final product.
In other words, what would be contained a master
plan itself. And as I said, one of the problems that
San Antonio had is that Article 9 of the Charter,
although saying thou shalt have a plan and
specifying in some detail the legal effect of the
plan, didn't really give much guidance as to what a
plan should be. So the planning department, in
conjunction with the commission, but largely the
staff of the planning department, came up with an
outline for a city plan which had five chapters.
And so they viewed it as a document which would
contain five chapters, and chapter one being an
introduction, chapter two being a summary,
chapter three being what they were calling the
plan basis, chapter four being the goals,
objectives, and policies of the plan, and then
chapter five dealing with implementation. What
they... Too bad they hadn't read Ken's book. Well,
that would have only confused them. Oh, no. So
the... Now, the idea was this. The idea was to focus
the effort on Chapter 4. Chapter 4 being the goals,
the objectives, and the policies of the plan
itself. And in order to do that, it was necessary to
develop... a statement of goals. And so what
happened in this period of time, and most of this
effort was occurring from mid-1977. Well,
actually, the big effort on Chapter 4 was an effort
that took place during calendar year 1978.
And the idea was to deal with a set of goals and then
to articulate those goals into objectives and
further specify those objectives into a set of
policies. And so the
planning department staff working with the
commission came up with a number of different
areas. And I needn't go into all this, but the
result was that in September of 1978, a draft of
Chapter 4 was presented by the Planning
Department staff to the Planning Commission. And
it was a very detailed document. It contained 60 or
so pages of lots of statements. Basically, it was
about 60 pages of goals, objectives, and policies
dealing with major areas. You deal with
neighborhoods and conservation and all
different kinds of things. Well, that document,
Chapter 4,
really created a lot of controversy for a lot of
different reasons. One reason was that many
people, and after you read 60 pages of goals and
objectives and policies, you're sure to find some
that you don't like. So most people just took
exception to the detail and to a lot of the
substantive statements in those goals. In
addition...
In addition, a lot of people felt that, well, if
we're dealing with Chapter 4, where are the other
chapters, particularly where is chapter three
which was entitled the plan basis and was to be all
the substantiating information that would set
the stage for chapter four. So people were saying
well this is out of context.
The commission felt strongly after dealing with
this for several months and it was just an
incredible amount of time going through these
things, all kinds of public hearings all kinds of
dealing with citizens. And finally, in March of
1979, the commission said, well, why don't we just
pass it on to city council and let them tell us, let
them provide us with some direction. And
essentially that's what the commission did. It
sent the whole thing to city council. City council
rejected it out of hand and said, and provided some
guidelines for how one might go about developing a
document. And in reaction to that in mid-79, going
into late 79, the whole idea of thinking about what
the plan would look like got restructured And the
idea was to come up with, to first deal with a
planned basis, some very general overall goals,
and the institutional settings and all of that.
And that was accomplished in a relatively short
period of time. Went back to city council, was
approved sometime in 1980, I don't recall, when
mid-1980, August of 1980, And then that was the
plan basis. And then from that, we've had a series
of specific plans, the land use plan, the
transportation plan, and all of those have been
accomplished.
Different elements of a comprehensive plan. Yes.
So the council has then taken action on all of these
elements? Well, what's happened since that time,
and again, we've got to get back to some of the
change in directors, but the basic plan was
approved, I think, in August of 1980. And then
since then, a number of different elements of the
plan have been approved by the city council. In
other words, the transportation major
thoroughfare plan was originally approved in
1978 and has been revised since then. The land use
plan, which was a major effort of the city, was
approved about two years ago, I think in about
1988.
I think it was 1983 it was approved, okay. And then
there have been some specific things like the
Parks and Recreation Plan and a number of others
that are also either functional or geographic
elements of the plan have been approved, all under
the umbrella of the basic plan as kind of the
departure point. I see. Okay. The plans that you
mention in the book, I'm going to refer to them as
elements of the comprehensive plan. Well, that's
what they are. So we can keep our nomenclature
consistent within the book.
I thought we were doing an interview. I guess I'm
confused. No, go ahead. I just, I
knew it would happen.
I just got a notice here that Joe Esherick has
achieved emeritus status, having a re-informer
Berkeley. So, all right. The council has taken
action on these various elements, some of them,
element by element. Do you think that they will be
moving toward adopting the entire package of
elements? Well, there's no need to. The way the
process was set up is that they approve the basic
framework first, and then the elements are
approved as they're finished. So they
automatically become part of the overall
document. They have approved the framework. Yes,
that was the basic plan.
That was done in August of 1980. And then let me just
go back and explain that Hunter left sometime in
79. And I don't recall. I think it was late in 79 or
very early in 1980. And then Lou Fox, who was an
assistant city. I think we should say about Hunter
that when Hunter left, he became planning
director in Las Vegas. No. When Hunter left, he
went to work for the Council of Governments in
Reno. Reno, yes. Yes. And as far as I know, he still
did. Yes, I think he still did. When he left,
Lou Fox, Louis J. Fox, who's now city manager of San
Antonio and at that time was assistant city
manager, kind of became an interim planning
director. while they were looking for a new
planning director. What happened, it's kind of
interesting that the city, because of some of the
problems in the planning department over
that period of time, 77 to 80, wanted to hire a
strong administrator. They weren't really
concerned about hiring a planner. They wanted to
hire a strong administrator. That resulted in
sometime in 1980,
and I don't recall when, late in the year or early
1981, hiring Roland Lozano as director of
planning. And he is still the director of planning
in the city of San Antonio.
L-O-Z-A-N-O.
And in the meantime, Houston has hired a new city
planning director who came from Southern Ohio.
Yes, that was a classmate of mine at school. And he
is proceeding with a new style of planning for
Houston. Yes, as his education taught him to do.
We'll see what comes of that.
So, where are we now? We're right up to date on
planning directors. Well, yeah, in terms of
planning directors, we are. What is the style of
your current planning director? Well, Roland's
more of an administrator. I mean, he was hired
specifically as an administrator as opposed
to... He is not a planner. He's had no experience
and no education in planning. He is, and he has been
a... uh i think he's got an mpa and he has been a
manager of various departments and city
government so he's just in as a manager okay let's
talk a minute about planning staff who are
professional planters and who have made
contributions to planning in san antonio either
project planning or comprehensive planning
aside from the planning directors? You might
start with anyone who's currently on the staff
that you're aware of. Well, how much detail do you
want? Well, I'm talking about senior planner
level and that sort of thing. People who are in
charge of various projects or comprehensive
plans. Well, let me just throw out some names over
the years and... some of these people you might
want to interview.